---
title:  "Your First CLI App"
excerpt: Create a command line application to keep track of questions you'd like to have answered as you learn how to code. This application will teach you basics of the Command Line Interface (CLI) as well as how to run programs from your terminal and read and write into files using Ruby.
---

## Introduction

First, you need to open your terminal. First time users will probably need to press `⌘ + space` to bring up your spotlight search. Simply beign typing "terminal", and your computer should find it for you. [Here](https://www.learnenough.com/command-line-tutorial#sec-running_a_terminal) is a wonderful tutorial all about getting comfortable with the terminal. You'll also want a text editor, like [Sublime](https://www.sublimetext.com/3). Ruby comes pre-installed on newer versions of iOS, so we shouldn't need anything else to get going!

## Getting Started

Let's start with our Ruby file greeting us when we run it. In our text editor we'll type a greeting command into our Ruby file.

{% highlight ruby %}
puts "hello!"
{% endhighlight %}

Since we'll be using this file to build our questions tracker, let's just save this file as 'questions.rb'. Now, when we go back to our terminal and enter 'ruby quetions.rb' you'll see "hello!" (or whatever greeting you saved in your .rb file) printed in the terminal.

## Running the Program from Anywhere

It's not much of a hassle to type 'ruby questions.rb', but if we want to read and add questions right away without always coming back to this specific directory, we'll need to make some changes. If we go back to our file in the text editor, we can add a line at the top to tell the computer what kind of file interpreter to use.

{% highlight ruby %}
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
{% endhighlight %}

This line explains what is needed to read the file properly. Now that we've added this, we don't need to prefix our terminal command with 'ruby'. Just typing 'questions.rb' will give us the same result since the instructions to use ruby are now a part of the file itself. It's a nice bit of convenience, but we still haven't told our computer how to find this file from anywhere else. In the terminal, we're going to enter a new command.

`ln -s $PWD/questions /usr/local/bin/`

This command builds a link. The middle part '$PWD/questions' is where your questions file is, and the last bit '/usr/local/bin/' is where your questions tracker is being linked. We're not quite done yet! Now we need to give permission to run this file from outside its directory.

`chmod u+x questions`

Back in our terminal let's try entering 'questions'. You should see the greeting you entered earlier in the tutorial. Try jumping around your directories and calling 'questions' from multiple locations. Now you can run your simple ruby program from anywhere simply by calling its name.