---
title:  "What is the DOM?"
excerpt: An introduction to the DOM and using Javascript to manipulate webpage contents. Learn about navigating DOM nodes and creating events to edit or add new nodes to the DOM.
---

## What is the DOM?

DOM stands for "Document Object Model". The DOM is (usually) an HTML document that determines what elements make up a webpage. Each element in the DOM is called a "node". Nodes may be nested inside each other, creating relationships much like a family tree.

### Node Relationships

The node may contain many nodes within itself; those are its "children" or "child nodes", and it may be contained within another node, its "parent node". A node can only be contained within one element, so each node can only have one parent, but may have many children. Nodes contained within the same parent, but not within each other, are considered "siblings". Like children, each node may have many siblings.

### Navigating the DOM

In our code, the DOM is an object called "document". We select nodes by calling a number of methods on the DOM. Nodes are HTML elements, and as such can also be identified by their tags, with `.getElementsByTag("&tag")[i]`. Here, "i" is its index in an array of all nodes with the chosen tag. We can also pick our nodes by class, using `.getElementsByClassName("&class")[i]` or by id with `.getElementById("&id")`. Remember, since an ID is unique this last method won't return an array.

This isn't the only way to navigate the DOM, however! The relational structure of the DOM means we can use these relationships as a means to navigate the DOM tree. To step up to a node's parent, we use `.parentNode`. Easy! Since nodes may have many children and siblings, we have more methods to deal with getting to them. Using `.nextSibling` and `.previousSibling` let us cycle through nodes that share a parent. "Next" and "previous" are determined in the order they show up in our DOM when reading from the top down. Child nodes can be called with `.firstChild` and `.lastChild`, which like with siblings are in the order they appear in the DOM. We can also pick a specific child with `.childNodes[i]` where "i" is the index of the node you wish to select in an array of all child nodes.

### Events

What's up with all this DOM talk anyway? Well, knowing how to edit the DOM lets us change our website in response to certain "events". Instead of having a page that is simply a static display, we can make our webpage respond to things like a user clicking on a button or icon, somebody scrolling down the page, or have things happen on a timer, like those old-school jumpscare pages (you know the ones). To set a trigger to change our DOM, we need to be paying attention for any of these "events". If we want to set one of these triggers, we need to write an event listener. For example, let's look at this sample here:

{% highlight ruby %}
document.getElementByID("clock").addEventListener("click", startTimer)
{% endhighlight %}

This bit of code is targeted on a DOM node "clock". It could be an icon, a button, an image, or whatever else, but we've chosen for convenience to give it an ID to call on. The second part of our sample is looking specifically for the "click" event, and when a user clicks on this node a function called "startTimer" will run. We can use all sorts of events to detect if a user has hovered over an element with their mouse, or scrolled past an article into the comments section, or has finished watching a video.

### Editing the DOM

Not only can we add events to respond to users on a webpage, we can use DOM manipulation to add, remove, or change nodes in the DOM, actively changing the appearance of a page. We can select a node we wish to edit, using any of the methods described above, and can set or change their attributes. If we want to change an image's source, we could do that with something like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
document.getElementById("photo").src = "$url"
{% endhighlight %}

Here, we use `.src` to set or change the image we want displayed for our DOM node "photo". We can also edit the content of nodes with methods like `.innerText` and `.innerHTML`, or adjust the CSS of a node with `.style.$CSSrule`. Not only can we adjust the nodes, we can even create nodes as we wish. Methods like `.createElement` and `.cloneNode` allow us to build nodes or copy existing ones and add them to the DOM with `.insertBefore`, `.insertAfter`, and `.appendChild`.

### Get Familiar

Being comfortable with DOM navigation is a big part of web development, particularly in writing Javascript to interact with users. Inspect some websites you visit to see DOM structures in action. Most websites you come across are incredibly complex, so don't worry about understanding everything you see right away. Most of it won't make sense until you get familiar with many of the common frameworks used in modern web development. At first, just find the nodes themselves and make a note of their relationships. Which ones are siblings? How many child nodes does an element have? How many generations deep is an element? Understanding the relation between nodes will get you on the path to building your own websites bigger and better than before.
